---
title: "Sugars and Synapses: A Statistical Examination of Cognitive Functionality and Beverage Consumption"
description: As a Research Assistant at Brigham Young University, I was tasked with evaluating the data from a lab study evaluating nutrition and cognition. Here I explain my methods of analysis and the final results.  
layout: post

github:
    is_project_page: true
    repository_name: GlucCog-Final
    repository_url: https://github.com/jxnpass/GlucCog-Final

date: 2023-11-14 17:50:00
---

Bear with me, I'm still writing this! 

## Table of Contents
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Experiment Design](#experiment-design)

## Introduction

The Department of Nutrition, Dietetics, and Food Science at Brigham Young University aimed to determine in this study the effects of the AS aspartame, the caloric sugar sucrose, and water on short-term cognitive performance. In addition, glucose samples were collected as both a process measure and to correlate changes in blood glucose with any changes in cognitive performance. They hypothesized that an 11% sucrose-sweetened beverage would improve cognitive performance after a fasted state (as glucose levels rise) compared to the 0.05% aspartame-sweetened beverage or water ~20, and ~60 minutes post-consumption. They also inferred the aspartame and water groups would perform similarly in cognitive tasks as well as in blood glucose response. 

I served as the main research assistant over statistical analysis, and my role was to organize their laboratory data and test and analyze their hypotheses. Over the course of a year and a half, I have cleaned messy data, manipulated variables, performed and fitted varying models, and described the results in tables, graphics, and writing. My progress was regularly checked by my statistics professor/advisor, and I regularly communicated work to the student-researchers and professor in the NDFS Department.

Over this period of time, our research team expanded their research hypotheses and questions. The statistical methods I used are aimed towards answering the following:
1. Is there some effect from drink content on cognitive outcomes?
2. Do the drinks influence the cognitive domains uniquely, such as executive function, memory, attention, or processing speed?
3. How do drinks affect the blood glucose concentration (BGC) in participants after fasting for an extended period of time?
4. How is BGC related to cognitive scoring?
5. How are certain body characteristics related to BGC or cognitive scoring?

Our research paper highlighted and answered these questions. The R programming project goes through each of these questions and reveals the processes by which we came to each conclusion.

My main goal for this blog post is two-fold: to summarize the results from the research paper with a touch of a mathematical perspective, provide the basic statistical coding, concepts, and other material utilized in the project.

## Experiment Design


